In what city were you located? Oakland. In
Oakland. He had, as I mentioned, sorry to tell you,
he had known about me from my skiing, teaching
skiing at Sugar Bowl, California.
His girlfriend had taken a lesson from me. When
would that happen? there
would have to be 52 53 51 52 in there and then She
evidently, like, said some nice things about me.
So when he cornered me one time on a tennis court, we
had played a couple of sets, and he said, you know,
Dennis, what are you going to do after you come back
from the ski season next year? I said, well, come
and see me. I'm going into a brand new business that
might need an outside setting. So when the time
came around, I put on my Grave Lounge suit.
Oh, yes, yes. Dodge Ridge Speed School. That was
when I already worked for her. So you taught first
at Sugar Bowl? Sugar Bowl. And the syrup of it a lot.
And Bill Klein, my boss, I
worked for him. He and his brother came home. His
brother came and hired Bill to stay there. He
stayed. He lived with his wife. who
was the daughter from Professor Hildebrandt,
famous professor at Berkeley. He had married one
of the Hildebrandt daughters. They stayed at the
Sierra Club in the middle of the club, and it's
about five or six miles, and they commuted to
Detroit. I worked in those days. It was horrible.
Because
they needed somebody to teach the Seraphim to go
cross-country, so they could go to the outlying
pandas overnight, stay overnight. And there
weren't too many people who knew how to
cross-country. Yeah, right. What do
you like most about cross country skiing? What is
it that appeals to you? Oh, actually, I like the
alpine skiing itself. It's a basic course that you
have to understand. You have to get from the lodge
to the rift in a decent fashion, which means you
have to climb, apply various climbing steps and
cross country steps. And you can't look like a
schlock to do it. You have to look like a pro, say.
And now it's, of course, involved again. In my day,
it was all Alpine skiing. Nobody except the
Sarabove members. And they gave
their members
a little test.
They wouldn't take you to one of the Grub Hut or
Anderson Hut unless you had passed the test. And it
was my job to prepare their members to pass this
test. It was an ambition everybody wanted to do, to
go to this outlying hut. Because it was, it is
beautiful to go to. It's a day they feel they have
their time. So quite an adventure. And a lot of them
were from the University. Oh, the
university
had a lodge only about 150 feet from there, from
Syracuse. They had a claripan lodge. The
university had a lodge in the German. People built
a lodge called the German Club. So there was, on a
holiday, George Washington's birthday was,
through the holiday, the 50th anniversary. 400
people in a very small area. And Sugar Bowl I liked
for one reason. You could not drive a car. And you
were really way out. And I figured out no FBI agent
was right, and I would never ski in, hook it into
sugar bowl. I mean, I really relaxed. You know,
anywhere else when the car could drive up, as long
as, you know, people would, a car would pull up and
two guys would get up. You know, who are they? You
say, by the chuggerball, there was no way. If they
had to come up there, they would come, they would
hook them, and they'd be a lot more tired than you
would by the time you got there. Yeah, yeah. So I'd
have a few months of rest before running to my R&R.
And during the summertime, you did what? That's
the hard part. I see. In the beginning, I had to go
get these part-time jobs as a fruit taker. I
continued that on, which I'd learned in the
beginning about this underground movement of
laborers that followed fruits. I'd learned that.
In
the beginning, the contract broke out because I
was riding with these hobos in the freight car, and
they just didn't share with you. And they share
information where you're going. They'd say
they're going to El Centro with the oranges that
they're going to be ripe in about a month or so. So
we're going to pick oranges. Do
you want to come along? He's a fraternity. Well,
for one thing, we don't... They're not registered
anywhere.
You don't need a social security card.
You can be other kinds of fugitives, too. You could
be running away from your wife or alimony or
whatever. They don't ask you, so they're kind of a
good group to join. Sure, sure.
No, it
was New Mexico. Yeah,
I ended up in California. Well, I caught, when I got
out that night, they were all going to a movie, and I
used the movie as a diversion. Hopefully. Before
we get to the escape, let me hold that escape for a
second. You were a camp translator. You went on an
empty liberty ship. A liberty ship somehow built
from North Africa to Camp Shanks, New York, or to
Norfolk,
Virginia, into the
United States. Was it a difficult trip going
across? Well, we were three, about three, I don't
know, three, five, six, seven, eight. You
were allowed to go smoking. And that's where I sold
my cigarette case off. I wouldn't lie. Sold it to an
American guard. But your officers were
maintaining discipline over your troops? Yeah.
And
I don't know how that really comes about. It's a
little strange, especially in the beginning, to
build a strange relationship. Our officers are
non-com officers, so I think it's a real
structure. different units now but it didn't
matter somebody had to do it which i think came back
to that role playing that we were taught to begin
with it makes it easy for us you know they could have
asked me to take it and i would have done it And they
would have followed. Whoever gets the command,
they followed. They would report to the opposing
officer, camp officer. Just like they would
report to the highest ranking officer in the
German army. So it was very
little difference. Were you searched often for
souvenirs and for belt buttons and all that sort of
stuff? I think you're still wearing
your, you're still wearing your, your African
coin uniform. Yes, I think we finally had
different clothes when we went to the workshop.
Because if Elias doesn't defeat us in a mass
production, they took, you know, they took all our
clothes away, which made a lot of sense.
There
was nothing that you wanted because you had to
carry it anyway. Well, I was thinking that they
were taking things from you. Oh, they didn't. At
American Guard. No, they wouldn't. They were too
polite. They wouldn't answer me. They couldn't
have it. And I didn't know if they were trading the
box or something. No, the Americans were very
polite. And they were, like I say, they were
smiling. And, you know, there was no put-down of
any kind that we felt, you know. What
do you think when you saw the first American black
troops? Well, I
mentioned that one outfit that was all black feet
and was a hundred feet tall and two or three inches
and all their handguns and western type things
flung low with a separate belt. It
was all over with. That was strange. It was a
specialty outfit at some point. We couldn't do the
outfit. And we were looking at the restaurant. We
had never seen it before. It was kind of different,
but we didn't, we couldn't do it. We figured
they had to be in Jeeps because they couldn't walk.
They were so overweight. They were all 250 pounds.
So we all gave them a Jeep, I guess. You know, they
may have been MPs? No, I don't know. They had
a white spot around them. Yes, you're right.
Military police. Yes,
they were segregated. Unless they were actually
with these quarter books, they were segregated.
I'm going to try to wash them.
Do
you have any questions?
It
won't matter to them. Don't worry about it at all.
There's a group of, there are people who are
waiting in conversation for transcripts. The
University itself wants the tapes for the article
for the University of America. Do you want to hear
my question before you read the paper? Do you know
what they want me to answer first? I'll hear it for
you. I have a little story I'm going to move on to.
Amen.
Yeah.
Actually,
tennis, my doctor told me I had a curvature of the
spine that should take up something. It was quite,
quite thin. So it was before the major illness?
Yes, yeah. So for medical reasons? For medical
reasons, I got into tennis. And I just kept
bouncing around. It seemed like I came right back.
Not
as well, I mean, I lost, I wouldn't win as many races
like I would before, you know, but I still was
better than average in those sports, which she was
certain that saved my race. Yeah, you know, the
other question was, I'm not a sportsman.
Thank
you.
.
. . .
Well,
we felt surrounded, I guess, because we were cut
out from the real play. That's where we were. Yeah,
we were filming. Maybe
we'll cut out from the world and come back to it. .
. .
It
seemed to me almost a replay of WWI. It bothered me.
Because the people who wore this were the same
people. I've
read in history that this happens frequently,
that the same war is fought two or three times, I
think, the June War, the June War. And so we were
historically in the same, so whatever, WWI was not
finished, I guess.
Well,
I
think they had some pretty lofty ideas. I think
they, I would think that they were going for
growth. They were going to go for all the models
that they followed, that they were looking for
other people. That's the impression I have of the
way they went about it.
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. But
I would say, I'm sure they had political demands,
like one of my friends in the SS, and I'm sure that is
true of the entire world. This part of the country
has a military tradition
that I'm from, you know, the eastern part, so I'm
pretty great on whatever. So there was just
military tradition type things. But I'm sure that
first unit I was in in the Congress dated back from
the great division. Ancient. Those horses and
that equipment.
What
do you think about that?
Is
it my cigarette? I just snuck a cigarette in.
That's
my only
advice. If I gave it up, I'd just have to find a new
advice. Do you know what she was going to ask you?
Well, I felt very much that it was, because I had
read enough about W71. I just knew it was just an
extension of that. because
there were so many of
the people, our adversaries, were practically
the same. So, you know, I thought it was just a
continuation of the discussion. And knowing
enough about European history, that was not
unusual, because we had a 100-year war, we had a
30-year war, we had the Napoleonic Wars, So war is
nothing unusual. You saw that one quote when I,
that probably was true because I was getting very
fed up, you know, a lot of, part of my motivation,
and I wasn't just fed up with Germany, it was fed up
with Europe, you know. That was probably quite
true. I said, you know, I really had it with these
guys, you know. Sure, sure. They were paying
attention to me, so goodbye. Yes. I split. Good,
good. Especially once finding out that the
Russians had taken over that area. Yeah, it was
nothing, you know, for me, because I certainly
couldn't save my family. Guys my age, they were
just, you know, gone. They were camps, and you
can't survive them. The first time you get a cold,
You're
finished. You know, there's no way that you can get
it. I was just very concerned and interested in
what you were thinking about the fact that
30-year-old boys and girls, which certainly is a
great thing. You know a lot about them, don't you?
Dry
sandwiches at night, mostly bloodwurst. Stuff
like that. No hot meals. Maybe if I came home, They
and my father might make a ginseng broth or a duck or
something, you know, on special occasions. But on
the night, when I was a student, it was mostly dry
sandwiches. It was dark bread, no butter, you
know, really dry, nothing. So, died, you know,
another day. Yeah,
they thought I was a poor eater. You know, they'd
give me big platters of dry sandwiches. They'd
give you better food, you'd have been a better
eater. Yeah, because I was a good eater in this
country. You know, once
I got... My hair was falling out terribly. When was
this? Well, I was still a student. I wasn't even in
the Army. I was using, you know, all these widow
peaks, I said. I remember distinctly, I went to
this cafe, you know, and I said, I'm going to be bald
when I'm going to be, you know, because of all
these, after you go through a fever, whenever you
have something with fever, you use your hair, you
know. And
once I got decent credit, first of all, I ate
nothing but fruit because I was a fruit picker. I
had the best peaches. There are no peaches. You
cannot buy those peaches that I ate when you're
picking right off the tree. I mean, they're like an
alcoholic beverage. They're so good. And, you
know, cherries, ripe cherries are cheap. You
cannot buy them. You have to be a picket. To get the
best stuff. The best stuff. So, fruits which we
never have in Germany. See, the very thing that I
probably craved the most and needed the most to get
back on my feet.
And
the needs,
of course, were plentiful. Let
me bounce back to the camps. Do the recollections
of the different camps strike you? You went to
camp. You were at Han. You were in...
One I do, we worked in a hospital in Fort Knox,
Kentucky, which I thought was very far off because
I knew that's where all the gold in the world was.
Yes, right. And I thought it was far off to be near
all the gold in the world,
most of the gold in the world. And then... But
most of the time I was a translator. You were
translating the foreign and the general
population to the American officers? For the
Germans.
For the Germans.
Yeah.
Well, we had whoever was in command, the German
side of it, would want to talk to the commander, the
American commander, and usually the guy that
would command the United States. Yes. Because he
was probably, he had the most years in the regular
army. Yes. So he was not... to
train languages.
But he had the rank. So he was in charge. And I would
just transpire. And then. Like what kind of
subjects? Orders would be passed on from the
American commanding officer and camp commander.
And he would say, I want all the population, camp
populations who be
sure to pick up all cigarette butts or something.
So orders went back and forth. Back and forth, and
what do you need, yeah, wishes, what can you use to,
you know, they didn't really know what to do with
them most of the time in the beginning, especially
when they got into sports, soccer ball, you know,
They wanted footballs and they didn't know soccer
from football. That seems to be ancient. They can
never get that straight. The jurors to this day
cannot understand the difference between soccer
and football. And then translate the newspapers.
I got the news to read the American newspapers and
the war reports. from
the German high command that they carried in an
American newspaper, and I was allowed to
translate that for you. For the German high
command, yes. Were you ever accused of anti- or
pro-American behavior? Nobody ever suggested
that you were too close to the American
authorities or that you were too far from the... I
managed to be right
in your way. That's not me.
I don't do that. But sometimes there's no choice.
No, sometimes they cast you. They cast you or
simply injure you. I know what you're saying, but
it's not for my own good. I'm just going to show you
that there's someone who can do it. No, I
don't know what's behind it. Like you say, they can
accuse you of it, but you can't prove it otherwise.
Once they label you, you know, I stopped beating my
wife. Yes, yes, sure. When? Yeah. I
have, you know, some friendship and respect with
almost anybody. And even to this day, in all my
dealings with people, I've been very fortunate to
be able to always have that, you know, hope for
people that are holding us. So there was no
difficulty? What possessions did you have in the
camp? You couldn't have been captured by a whole
lot.
I
remember falling down. I was in Texas. And it was
difficult. It was standing. And I fell down and
dislocated my shoulder. And was it a family thing?
Wouldn't be surprised. But I did win the camp
championship. Yes,
yes.
So when
you were on the run, you didn't have anything left
from your earlier days? I had one movement. I had
traded a ring from America. In North America?
Silver. And it had a... very
graceful graphic in black inmates and civilians,
especially the feet of a running, either a
steinbock or an antelope or something, which I
associated with me. Who is a graceful, running,
jumping animal? Who kept that in mind? In fact, I
took a
handmade, leather-shaded pattern. And I had that
made in Iraq. And it was long time ago. It's still in
America. OK, you can evaporate it all the time. So
you should put it in there so that every time it
comes back, you know it's in there. In
the ring or the... I know this. Well, it's
certainly not something that you would have been
able to know about. Yeah, and I couldn't explain
it. I couldn't even wear it. It was just a good luck
charm. But it was a graceful,
you know, as I mentioned, I'm in graphics, and I'm a
student, and I'm a symbol. Yes. of
race and flight, speed and prowess and success.
But there was no, of course, agreement or no
agreement. But you see, psychologically, it's
important, when you're on the loose, to have
something. However small, you have to have
something that reminds you of the old, of where
you're from and what... As a matter of fact, I got a
psychological...
You found that
out,
huh? Well, I have a psychological study called On
Remaining the Same Person. Once you're on the
loose, there are certain things that you have to do
to remain the same person that you were before. And
one of the things that you shouldn't have is any
possessions that everybody has, however small.
Maybe you need
a mind,
but something you need that's part of you. Oh,
no, no. This isn't a... Yes. Oh, absolutely. Yes,
sure. She gave me a marvelous gold ring. Why would I
keep that silver one? Yes. How you describe that in
flight. Oh, in flight? Oh, yes. In flight and
stability. You know, we've been doing this. Oh,
yes. It's just... It served me well at that time.
You have other, you have new things all the time. Of
course, of course. You change. Yes. And you're
right. You have to. That was one of the decisions I
made, that I was going to remain the same person. I
was not going to be an actor, play act, try to be
something, you know, and act something out. First
of all, I'm not an actor. So I wasn't even going to
try that. I was going to be... But I was going to find
my cover that would be as close to me as possible.
Which was... I have to apologize to Candy because I
said I was from Connecticut. That had snow. I knew
it had snow. I'd never been to Connecticut, but I
knew it had snow. And I knew it had some small towns.
And I knew nobody is from Connecticut. I'd never
met anybody from Connecticut in California. I had
to find all these things to make a story that would
fit me as a person. I'll bet you became a good actor.
I'll bet you And strangely enough,
I'm just going to interject this. That integrity
that he has always had was what was so confusing to
me later on when I couldn't track that with the
shallowness and the rest of his relationship with
me, that we could only go this far in who he really
was. You know, when the chips were on the line. Yes,
yes. Who really are you? That was the hardest part
because I knew he had this, he was all together as a
person somewhere, but I couldn't get at that, only
that superficial layer. So he always was his own,
and he still is. He is that person. Don't act.
Except for the cover story. Yes, yes. And whenever
that came up, I tried to either leave the room,
change the subject, do some diversion. Because I
don't like to go into that. It's such a dumb cover
story. I don't even want to think about it. You
know, I hate it. But that was the story I had, too,
for 19 years. The Connecticut story? Did you say
born in Connecticut or just the story? What did
they say? You were born and raised in upper state
New York, went to phonetic school for boys, an
agress non-existent. Your parents were killed in
an automobile accident when they were 45,
something like that, and nobody stopped to think
about it. Yes.
Although, you know, I know people from Milwaukee
who were born in this country who have a very thick
accent. And in California. Who would know? But I
think instinctively, somehow, instinctively, I
stayed away from anybody German. To this day? To
this day. We played tennis at Diamond Head, and
there's a bunch of
Germans there that work in the company. I never
talked to them.
I think these guys that got caught, they went to,
they were glad to see somebody they could talk to,
could understand. Yes, that's exactly right.
They usually, many of these men did get caught
because they... That's the worst thing you can do.
You've got to stay away from your own kind. What
other rules would you say are things to know in
remaining a successful fugitive? Don't go around
people who speak the same language. It's anywhere
near that background, anywhere near. Murphy's
Law is very important. Whatever's going to go
wrong will go wrong. So if you plan for everything
that could go wrong. As soon as you see the least
little problem arising, you must observe
Murphy's Law at all times. Like, you know, you
cannot go to the elevator with something up. My
dear darling wife. Yes. Always turn. Thanks,
darling. I mean, you know, that has to be covered.
Sure. And... The other night she used the example
of how you put your fork and knife down on the plate.
And as soon as I found out, you do not put it down, you
know, like the Europeans. Yes. All they had to do
was look for a guy that did that. Yes. You must learn
the customs and... of eating with your changing
fords, you see? And you don't insist of doing it
your way. You must blend and take on that. Well,
that was one of the things, now that you, this
brings it back. I remember I made a very basic
decision. I simply said, now, they won't let me,
since I'm not born American, But I want to be an
American.
I'm going to be an American. I've simply made up my
mind to be an American. It's just as simple as that.
So I became an American. And that's why I say I
blocked everything off. I did not go halfway. Say,
I want to stay German, half German, whatever. I
want to keep this. No. I said, I want to be an
American. A hundred percent. She always says,
you're more American than I am. In what ways would
you say? Do you mean habits? Philosophically,
politically. I'm American enough that I can just
really run this country down. Yes, oh sure, sure.
And he tempers my anger at the American system and
all that kind of stuff. Supportive.
Oh, like what?
Government systems. She knows less about the
system than I do. You have to make it your business
to find out. And read.
You have to read the paper every day. and study, you
have to continue your education. I saw the
certificates. That's nice. And in the 50s and 60s,
I would read all the books like How to Become a
Millionaire. What's Dale Carnegie? How to Be
Successful and Influence People. That was a big
bestseller. The Art of Public Speaking.
Peterson, Peter's Principle. Peter Principle.
All these books. She threw them all out when we
left. I had all these books. And just keep going on
your education. When you left? Just recently?
Well, right after we got married, we moved. We had,
what, some houses in California. And moving
always involved, you know, books. I see. You still
read this thing? No? You say no, that means no. I
travel light. I perpetuate it. It's his behavior.
Which is all right, because if you don't, the book
doesn't really do you any good if it doesn't. If you
don't have it up here, it's not going to do it.
Although you could use it probably for reference,
but most people don't do that. So you would say a
rule is never go among people of the same ethnic
background. Always keep Murphy's Law in mind.
Remember what could go wrong and try to plan
against it.
What? Yes. Custom. Observe the customs. Don't
give too much information. Oh, no. Don't give any
information. I mean, don't tell more about
yourself or more about a story than is needed.
Would that be? No, that's correct. That's
absolutely correct. And you become a good
listener because your conversation isn't that
good, which is a good habit to have anyway. You
learn to listen. I was probably a big talker in
Germany. I was just going to say, later on though,
that turned itself around and you became a very
good talker.
But you didn't want real close relationships, so
you talked a lot.
But never anything... below the superficial
level. Oh, philosophical. You and I are each
other's very best friends because we don't have a
lot of things. And that's by both of our choices. We
just never let anybody get below that. Yeah. You
know, like couples, some couples are very, very
close. They know everything about each other.
Right, right. Play bridge three times a week. So
we've never had a lot of friendships. We have a lot
of good friends, but... who don't stay around here
long enough so that they can get their attention.
That sounds like you were made for one.
Absolutely. Made for one. Absolutely. Ideal,
made. You must find the ideal mate. Put that down.
You must find the understanding. I didn't want
anybody to get that close to me to understand me
beyond this whatever it is. And so we never pushed
each other. Actually, it's just sheer luck with
these things. Maybe it's some instinct, but a lot
of it is just sheer luck. All these rules wouldn't
do you any good if you just had some bad luck
somewhere along the line and ran into somebody
that knew you or something. You have to have some
luck. But this is a funny one. I just found that the
other day. Gene lets me keep this. This is from in my
heyday. Two girls? Yeah, two girls. These are
showgirls from the Mapes in Reno. One on my right
said she was a German countess. She may have been a
countess, but she was definitely German. And
which also was a good, a very, well, it was kind of
tragic at the end because...